# Particle_Physics_Event_Classification
## 1.1. Backstory
Particle accelerators. To probe into the basic questions on how matter, space and time work and how they are structured, physicists focus on the simplest interactions (for example, collision of subatomic particles) at very high energy. Particle accelerators enable physicists to explore the fundamental nature of matter by observing subatomic particles produced by high-energy collisions of particle beams. The experimental measurements from these collisions inevitably lack precision, which is where machine learning (ML) comes into picture. The research community typically relies on standardized machine learning software packages for the analysis of the data obtained from such experiments and spends a huge amount of effort towards improving statistical power by extracting features of significance, derived from the raw measurements.

Higgs boson. The Higgs boson particle, also called the God particle in mainstream media, is the final ingredient of the standard model of particle physics, which sets the rules for the subatomic particles and forces. The elementary particles are supposed to be massless at very high energies, but some of them can acquire mass at low-energies. The mechanism of this acquiring remained an enigma in theoretical physics for a long time. In , Peter Higgs and others proposed a mechanism that theoretically explains the origin of mass of elementary particles. The mechanism involves a field, commonly known as Higgs field, that the paricles can interact with to gain mass. The more a particle interacts with it, the heavier it is. Some particles, like photon, do not interact with this field at all and remain massless. The Higgs boson particle is the associated particle of the Higgs field (all fundamental fields have one). It is essentially the physical manifestation of the Higgs field, which gives mass to other particles. The detection of this elusive particle waited almost half a century since its theorization!

The discovery. On 4th July 2012, the ATLAS and CMS experiments at CERN's Large Hadron Collider announced that both of them had observed a new particle in the mass region around 125 GeV. This particle is consistent with the theorized Higgs boson. This experimental confirmation earned François Englert and Peter Higgs The Nobel Prize in Physics 2013

Giving mass to fermions. There are many different processes through which the Higgs boson can decay and produce other particles. In physics, the possible transformations a particle can undergo as it decays are referred to as channels. The Higgs boson has been observed first to decay in three distinct decay channels, all of which are boson pairs. To establish that the Higgs field provides the interaction which gives mass to the fundamental fermions (particles which follow the Fermi-Dirac statistics, contrary to the bosons which follow the Bose-Einstein statistics) as well, it has to be demonstrated that the Higgs boson can decay into fermion pairs through direct decay modes. Subsequently, to seek evidence on the decay of Higgs boson into fermion pairs (such as tau leptons or b-quarks) and to precisely measure their characteristics became one of the important lines of enquiry. Among the available modes, the most promising is the decay to a pair of tau leptons, which balances a modest branching ratio with manageable backgrounds.

The first evidence of decays was recently reported, based on the full set of proton–proton collision data recorded by the ATLAS experiment at the LHC during 2011-2012.Despite the consistency of the data with decays, it could not be ensured that the statistical power exceeds the threshold, which is the required standard for claims of discovery in high-energy physics community.

Particle accelerators enable physicists to explore the fundamental nature of matter by observing subatomic particles produced by high-energy collisions of particle beams. The experimental measurements from these collisions inevitably lack precision, which is where machine learning (ML) comes into picture. The research community typically relies on standardized machine learning software packages for the analysis of the data obtained from such experiments and spends a huge amount of effort towards improving statistical power by extracting features of significance, derived from the raw measurements.
## 1.2 Goal
In the field of particle physics, accurate identification and classification of events are crucial for understanding fundamental particles and their interactions. the provided dataset contains various features derived from particle physics experiments, and the goal is to build a machine-learning model to classify events into signal (s) and background (b) categories. this classification aids in distinguishing events of interest (signal) from background noise.
I develop a model that can accurately predict whether a given set of experimental features corresponds to a signal or background event. Successful classification contributes to the advancement of particle physics research by automating the identification of events that may indicate the presence of specific particles or phenomena.
